# Tips For Becoming a Senior Developer

## What do you need to become a Senior Developer?

1. Suck up to the boss
2. Find incriminating and leverage that to get a promotion
3. Threaten to hit your superior with mechanical keyboard

*Or is there another way to do this that's not against the law?*. Turn out there are multiple thing you can do and today I'm going to cover 8 of them.

## What are the main differences in developer positions?

That sound like a kamasutra thing.

*- "Honey you want to try the developer position tonight?"*

Generally speaking we make distinction between junior, middle tier (mid-level), and senior developers, also you have lead developers.

`Junior Developer`, usually have less than two or three years of development experience. They should know how to code in one or to languages and have some experience with some frameworks, tensorflow, than us data science, react, node.js for web development, depending on the area that the developer is working in.

`Medior Developer`, mid-leve developer, should have three to five years of experience. They should know how to operate in a development team in terms of toolsand languages you'd expect a bit of broader set of knowledge in more different domains like having both back-end and front-end experience, some of cases DevOps. Again it dependens in the area of the developer is working in.

`Senior Developer`, has at least five plus years of experience should know most modern programming languages or at last be able to quickly learn a new language and they should also have great other skilss such as communication, technical project management, and software design skills. Overall, a senior developer should have a more holistic view of software development and be able to come up with great software desgins.

`Lead Developer`, is like a senior developer but with a focus on management skills. They should be able to guide developemt efforts, pove that these efforts are valuable to the business. They should be expert at all aspects of software development including things like requirements engineering designs, test, QA, DevOps, managing teams.

Now those numbers that I mentioned, you know experience in years, those are just indications there are no strict rules. In fact, the number of years of experience doesn't even say that much. The difference lies mostly in that a senior developer will operate from a different mindset that the junior developer. Junior developer tend to focus on just making sure that the code works whereas the senior developers view the software and design more holistically and understand the difference between working software and good software.

So, how do you make the shft from a junior to a senior developer? How do you grow that different mindset?

## Tips for junior developers to grow a senior developer

1. `Write Well-Designed Code`, whenever you write code try to keep things simple. Good software will look it's really simple and straightforward. Don't try to show off: *hey, did you know you could use this dunder to change how inheritance works cool?*. Now, you actually don't many of th advanced features of a programmin language, keep things simple and basic, optimize your code for readability and from beain able to easily change it. Robert Martin, calls this `Clean Code`. What does it mean,wel follow desing principles so minimizing coupling between areas of the code, maximize cohesion so each piece of code is responsible for one thing only. Another thing, make sure your code is easy to test by introducing abstraction where needed, separate, creating resources from using them. So, you can inject them as a dependency. Also make sure to add comments to your code so it's easy to follow by others and yourself in a couple months. As Martin Fowler says:
    
    *"Any fool can write code that a computer can understand.
    Good programmers write code that humans can understand."
                                                  Martin Fowler*
2. `Always maintain learning mindset`. One of the biggest mistakes I see, developers make, is they think they need to know everything before they get started. Unfortunately, you're never going to know everything. In softare development learning actually never stops and it involves way more than just writing code. I mean you need to know the technologies that you use, libraries, data structures that are best for different problems, which design principles, patterns, help you wrtie clean code, how test and deploy your code, how to work with a team of developers, clients, other stakeholders and that's just the start. I mean technology is always changing so there's always goingto be more things to learn. If you want to become the best software developer out there embrace learning. Don't be afraid of change and the longer you do this the bigger impact is going to be.
3. `Document what you learn`, simply following online, watching videos, reading books and blogs you know that's not enough, it's crucial that you also internalize that information and give yourself the time to think things over take notes of the things you learn and write down your thoughs about a particular subject while you're learning about it. You know it's great to have a track record because you're going to forget things that might come in handy later on. Also if you write things down as you learn them that's going to allow you to see the progress you made by looking back at your older notes from time to time. There are lots of great tools out there to help you with this. You can use something simple like Notepad or Apple Notes, or you can use markdown files to gather your thoughts VS Code can format those files for you automatically or you can go all in with tool like notion. It's also useful to maintain a private git repository we can experiment with things and keep track of your coding history. In general, you want take your decisions using data and logic, and writing things down definitely helps them. For example, if you need figure out which cloud provider to choose for your appplication  write down the pros and cons of each determine what criteria are important for you, in terms of features, cost, how easy it is to implement in your context. And don't just say tool A is better than tool B because the website looks nicer or something. Understand why one is better than the other.
4. `Look at the bigger picture`, junior developers tend to have a smaller zone of focus when they working within a system whereas most senior developers have a birth eye view and more experienced developers will take time to think through the potential side effects of what they're doing as well as how this fits in the overal system. You can practice this by asking yourself some questions like: 
   - Is what I'm doing consistent with how things have done before in the code base?
   - Is this code going to be reused elsewhere in the system and will my code be easy to maintain or extend in the future?

    When you write software is quite natural to view things as software developer. Try to view the software from the user's perspective instead. how does that new fature added affect the flow that the user go through do the steps make sense other things you can do to make things easier for the user and I've noticed that spending a bit of extra time there by lookin at the bigger picture and pretending you're user and viewing the software in that way helps avoid a lot of bugs and probles in the long run.
5. `Take responsability for your work`, I've noticed junior developers tends to focus on implementing the feature that's requested from them and not think enough about vaious esting scenarios and edge cases. They assume that any bugs are going to be found by software testers or code reviewers but it works much better if you do rigorous testing yourself before submitting your code for a review. This saves time for the rest of the team and you won't have to pass the code multiple times through develoment and review. It's important to feel responsible for the quality of your work and make sure you hit that quality level by thinking yourself about the different edge cases. How the feature is going to be used and whether other parts of the software are going to be affected by it.
6. `Understand the context of what you're working on`, one of the things I noticed when running a startup is that it's really tempting to only focus on the product and only look at what next feature to add? How to make the software even better? But it's actually way more important to understand why you're building something. If you don;t understand what your customer actually needs, you're probably building stuf that the doesn't want so don't make too many assumptions about your customer and take the time to learn about how things work in the real world. Try to understand the real problem people have before thinking about the solution.
7. `Have open discussions about your design`, one of the best ways to improve the way you design software is by talking about it with your peers. If you work in a team of developers you can ask your team members to review your code and when they do make sure you're not only getting line blind feedback but also feedback on the overall structure of your design as this going to help you improve your designs skills. Also really important, try to do code reviews yourself of code by others and this helps you broaden your horizons as well as think about why certain designs work better than others and being able to articulate this clearly in a code review is an extremely valuable skill to have. What has helped me become better at design is to have open discussions about my decission with others and it's important to always keep an open mind. You know, don't get too attached to a specific solution or appriach to create an environment where everybody's free to discuss any idea and don't worry too much about the quality. It happened quite a few times to me in those discussions that I proposed an idea it was a really bad idea but then later on it triggered a great idea by somebody else so that's why you never put a filter on ideas in the beginning. One other, really fun, thing I like to do sometimes is to explicitly take the other side and explore what happens in a discussion just take the opposite stance of what you really think or what I also like to do sometimes is question a very basic assumption and see where it leads the outcome con be quite interesting.
8. `Have side projects`. Side projects are great for learning new lnanguages or platforms don't make these projects to large. It's also important that you're able to complete them so they're not to daunting and the same time give you a nice result. You often learn way more from side projects that from actual coding at your job because you'll be responsible for every aspect of your project and you'll have more freedom to explore it. Happened to me several times that a side project led to major changes in my company.

In the end, all these things lead to a certain learning mindset always being open to learn new things, learning from others, becoming a good listener, welcoming feedback on your work that learning mindset is going to be one of the most valuable skills you can have. It's going to allow grow personally and that in turn will lead to more compounding growth a great to explore your capabilities kick start you learning is by following courses.
